---
title: Unit 2.2 Metadata in reseach
author: Sarah White, Kate Reed
date: April 01, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcomes

- Metadata elemts
- Levels of Metadata
- Different types of metadata
- Different ways metadata is created
- Roles in metadata creation
- How much metadata you need to create

---

## How does metadata help research 

_[Add tasks here about searching CLOSER for a variable or ]_

---

## Metadata elements

- A metadata element is a unit of information that describes a piece of data. 

---

## Screenshot of metadata elements

---

## Levels of metadata

Metadata elements can be used to create different levels of metadata:

Project level

Dataset level

Item level

---

## What type of research data does metadata apply to? 

_[Does this belong here?]_

- Most obviously, metadata applies to data which has been collected for a specific purpose. For example:
  - Data captured through a measurement e.g. blood pressure
  - Data recorded through a question in a survey or census, or as part of an administrative process
  - Data captured through a device such as a location
- Less obviously it also applies to data such as text, images or sound which is processed into ‘numbers’ for statistical analysis
  
---

## Different types of metadata

There are three main types of metadata:

- Structural: Type of metadata that indicates how compound objects are put together. Examples include how pages are ordered to form chapters; how data are organised in a table; how datasets are organised in a collection.
  - [metadata element examples/screenshot]
    
- Descriptive: Metadata that describe a dataset or resource in such a way that people can discover and identify it. Contains information that aids with findability such as information (metadata elements) on the creator(s), affiliation(s), title, abstract, keywords, persistent identifier, related publications, etc.
  - [metadata element examples/screenshot]
    
- Administrative: metadata used to manage administrative aspects of the digital objects such as intellectual property rights and acquisition. Also documents information concerning the creation, alteration, and version control of the metadata itself. This is sometimes known as meta-metadata.
  - [metadata element examples/screenshot]

::
Codata definitions 2023
:::

---

## Practice: Identifying different types of metadata

_[In the screenshot below, identify which metadata is structural, descriptive or administrative.]_

**OR**

_[Organise this list of metadata elements into structural, descriptive or administrative.]_

---

## Answers: Identifying different types of metadata

[Provide answers for the above task.]

---

## Metadata myths

- Increased workload
- Time consuming and resource heavy
- Limited usability
- Not relevant for your data

[Provide myth busting explanations]

---

## How is metadata created?

Metadata is created in different ways:

- Automatically generated. For example:
  - Metadata software. for example: (This metadata stills needs to be verified by data managers and/or researchers)
- Maunually created, for example:

---

## When is metadata created and who creates it?

Prospective metadata creation (upstream)

Retrospective metadata creation

Metadata creators 
- Researchers, data managers

Roles in metadata creation
- It is useful to have multiple people working on metadata creation and management so metadata can be quality assured

---

## What metadata do you need to create?

No research is too small for metadata. Even an individual project will benefit from have strong metadata. The more metadata you create, the more discoverable, accessible and usable your data becomes. 

However depending on your resesources and how widely you want to share your data will determine what metadata you create and how much.

In our next unit, we will delve deeper into what metadata elements you could consider creating depending on you project size and aims. In this unit, we will cover on the metadata tools you should be aware in order to enact best practice.

---

## Test your knowledge
