---
title: Unit 2.4 Controlled vocabularies
author: Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcome

- Understand what controlled vocabularies are and why they're important
- Gain an overview of different types of controlled vocabularies: taxonomies and ontologies
- How to find the right vocabulary for your research
  
---

## Outline

- How do we make metadata machine readable?
- Best practice in metadata
- What are controlled vocabularies and when do you use them
- Importance of controlled vocabularies
- What are taxonomies and how are they used
- What are ontologies and how are they used
- How do we find controlled vocabularies?

---

## How do we make metadata machine readable?

- Consistent terms

 ---

## Importance of metadata best practice

If we don't follow metadata best practice, the quality and effectiveness of our metadata is diminished.
For example, why is this metadata not helpful?

[screenshot of bad metadata / duplication -- find on shared drive]


---

## Impact of bad quality metadata

- Inconsistent and duplicated metadata:
  - Diminishes the searchability and discoverability of data
  - Undermines the reliability and validity of data
  - Is time consuming as people have to identify what terms are relevant for their search and integrate different terms

If metadata is bad quality, it undermines the three mains purposes of metadata to increase discovery, understanding and resusability of data.

---
## Best practice in metadata 

In ensure metadata is effective, best practice in metadata creation needs to be followed.

These best practices should promote:
- Consistency so metadata reliably describes data and can be compared across datasets
- Accuracte description so data is easily understood
- Searchability of metadata so data is discoverable

---
## Tools for metadata best practice

Two main tools that are used implement metadata best practice are:
1. Controlled vocabularies
  - Taxonomies
  - Ontologies
2. Metadata standards

In this unit, we will look at controlled vocabularies and the related concepts of taxonomies and ontologies.
In the next unit, we will look at metadata standards.

---

## What are controlled vocabularies?

'A controlled vocabulary is a list of terms that describes a certain domain of knowledge. In the controlled vocabulary you **only use one term to describe one particular phenomenon**, excluding all other synonyms.'*

::: notes

*https://nbisweden.github.io/module-metadata-dm-practices/guide/index.html

Controlled vocabularies are used in descriptive metadata fields to support consistent, accurate, and quick indexing and retrieval of digital asset content. It has a specific definition associated with a particular value**.
** Hedden, H (2007) Taxonomies and controlled vocabularies best practices for metadata. (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/dam.2010.29)
:::

---

## Using a controlled vocabulary 

[Write an example of using a controlled vocabulary]

---

# Finding a controlled vocabulary

Controlled vocabularies are available online and there are many websites 

---

# Case study (practice): Finding a controlled vocabulary

What controlled vocabulary would you choose for this research project?

[Description of research project - discipline, area of enquiry]

---

# Case study (answer): Finding a controlled vocabulary

This is the controlled vocabulary we chose.

Reasons behind this choice:
- [give the thought process behind choosing that particular controlled vocabulary]

---

# Application: Find a controlled vocabulary for your research

Now you have practised finding a relevant controlled vocabulary, find a controlled vocabulary for your 

---

# Case study (practice): Using a controlled vocabularly 

---
# Case study (answer): Using a controlled vocabularly 

---

# Application: Using a controlled vocabularly 


---

## Test your knowledge 




