---
title: Unit 2.5 Metadata Standards
author: Kate Reed
date: April 09, 2025
---

## Intended learning outcomes 

- Overview of metadata standards
- How metadata standards benefits our research and promotes FAIR data
- How to find the right metadata standard for our research

---

## Metadata standards

Metadata standards are another tool enact metadata best practice.

A metadata standard provides a framework to establish a common set of definitions for various characteristics or attributes of data. [expand]

Standards can often specify:
- Which metadata elements are required and which are recommended
- Which controlled vocabularies to use
- The input type (e.g. ...) for the metadata element

---

## Types of metadata standards

Different types of metadata standards:
- General cross-discipline metadata standards (DublinCore)
- Discipline specific metadata standards

---

## Benefits of metadata standards

- Improves consistency
- Makes data more FAIR by increasing the quality of the metadata
  - Enables interoperability of data
  - Helps support cross-study and secondary research promoting data re-usability
- Saves researchers time in metadata creation as set rules have already put in place

---

## Case study: Cross study research

[include a cross-study research case study from CLOSER. point out how both use DDI]

---

## How to find the right metadata standard for your research

You can use metadata standard cataologues to search for the standard most relevant for your research.
These sites include:
- [Metadata standards catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/subject-index)
- [DDC Metadata standards guideline](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata)

---

## Case study (practice): Finding a metadata standard

Which metadata standard would you choose for this research project?

Using [Metadata standards catalogue](https://rdamsc.bath.ac.uk/subject-index) or the [DDC Metadata standards guideline](https://www.dcc.ac.uk/guidance/standards/metadata) identify a relevant metadata standard to use for this research.

[Description of research project - discipline, area of enquiry]

---

## Case study (answer): Finding a metadata standard

This is the metadata standard we chose.

Reasons behind this choice:
- [give the thought process behind choosing that particular metadata standard]

---

## Application: Find a metadata standardy for your research

Now you have practised finding a relevant metadata standard, find a metadata standard for you research.

---

## Test your knowledge


---

## Test your knowledge



