
## What metadata should I create?
- There are many different ways and types of metadata you can create, how should you decide?

---

## Individual to each research project

- Scope and aim of research
- Discipline

---

## Independent assessment

- If you're doing an individual research project for personal use, you could independently decide what metadata elements to capture
- 

However, using tools such metadata schemas and standards can help define what metadata elements to create, saving you time.

---

## Metadata schemas

Metadata schemas:
- Define what metadata elements to create
- Also define input for different metadata elements

---

## Metadata standards

Recap of metadata standards

Common metadata standards

Arts & Humanities
- Categories for the Description of Works of Art (CDWA): CDWA is a standard for the description of art, architecture, and other cultural works.
- Cataloging Cultural Objects (CCO): CCO is a guide containing value standards for the description of art, architecture, archaeological artifacts, and other types of material culture.
- Text Encoding Initiative (TEI): TEI is most commonly used for literary texts or manuscripts in the field of digital humanities.

Library & Information Science
- Online Information Exchange (ONIX) for Books: ONIX is an international standard for representing and communicating book industry product information
- PBCore: PBCore is a metadata schema designed for sound and moving images.
- Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies (PREMIS): PREMIS is used for creating preservation metadata for digital objects.

Physical & Life Sciences
- Crystallographic Information Framework/File (CIF): CIF is a standard for archiving and reporting crystal structure data.
- Darwin Core (DWC): Darwin Core is an extension of Dublin Core for biological diversity data.
- Ecological Metadata Language (EML): EML a standard for the earth, environmental, and ecological sciences.
- Flexible Image Transport System (FITS): FITS is a standard used for astronomy image data.
- NeXus: NeXus is an international standard for neutron, x-ray, and muon experiment data.
- ISO 19115: ISO 19115 is an international standard for describing geographic information.
- OpenGeoMetadata (OGM) Aardvark Schema: OpenGeoMetadata (OGM) is a metadata schema for geospatial resources.

Social & Behavioral Sciences
- Data Documentation Initiative (DDI): DDI is an international standard for describing social science datasets which includes a metadata specification, controlled vocabularies, and tools for working with DDI metadata.
- Friend of a Friend (FOAF): FOAF is a standard for social media and is focused on the relationships that connect people, places, and things described on the web.

:: notes
List reference: [University of Texas at Austin](https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/metadata-basics/domain-standards)

:::

---

## Metadata schemas and FAIR
