
---

## Idenitfying variables

Take a look at this dataset recording data from a survey. What are the variables in this dataset?

| f_n  | h   | b_d        | m_s  | 
|------|-----|------------|------|
| John | 178 | 1998-09-02 | s    |
| Gill | 200 | 1934-06-12 | M    |
| Alice| 182 | 1922-12-24| M    |

---

## Idenitfying variables

The variables are:

- f_n
- h
- b_d
- m_s


---

## What are variables?

[discussion question]

---

## Variable definition

---

## Why should we record variable metadata?

---

## Exercise - using variable metadata to search datasets 
- Demonstrate discoverability of data
---

## What metadata should you create?

Name - Variable name
Label	- Variable label
Representation - Variable structure and content
Source unit 	
Analysis unit 	
Population	
Format	

---

## Variable name and label

---

## Value represenation

- different types of value representation: text, numeric, code
- metadata could define this further: text (conditions/limits), numeric (type), code (codelist)
  
---

## Unit type and population
Define what unit type and population are 
Explain why they are important 

---

## You can add more metadata!

We are just covering some basic metadata elements however you can add more detail.

---

## How to collect variable metadata
_Suggest tools for collecting this type of metadata_

---

## How can we ensure variable metadata is high quality?
_Recap controlled vocabularies, metadata standards.
Interoperability _

---

## What we can do with metadata codebooks

Explain what a codebook is.
Give example of a codebook.
Why codebooks are important.

---

## Practice making variable metadata

[task with worked example and ecourage people to apply to own dataset]

---




   
